# 01. Extensibility through polymorphism

Date: 2021-09-18

## Context

I assume that most or all users of the package won't need the ability to extend the existing code, yet from the very beginning I have always defined classess with polymorphism in mind. Because of that, most methods and properties are marked as virtual, fields are usually protected, not private, and there are extra protected constructors in many cases, that allow providing most or all possible parameters to the base classes. This may cause an impression that the code is not very well thought out when it comes to hermetization.

However, it is really hard and time consuming to decide to what extent to open classes for extension, e.g. which fields should or should not be available for the descendants, or which methods and properties should be overridable. Therefore, the current, overly open approach, was the simplest to take. Nevertheless, there have to be some rules to follow in order to keep the solutinon coherent and to not generate too much redundant code that will have to be maintained (e.g. redundant class constructors). And this document describes them.

## Decision

1. **Public constructors** of classes should be defined based on the anticipated use cases and to provide convenience of use.
   1. If public constructors don't provide a way to initialize members of a class (because this is not necessary in terms of their normal use cases), there should be extra protected constructors called in chain, to allow for that. So if a public constructor creates some new objects to assign them to class members, then instead of initializing them directly, it passes the objects to another constructor that does the assignment.
2. **Fields** are **protected** [^1],
3. **Methods** are **virtual** [^1],
4. **Writable properties** are **virtual** [^1],
5. **Read-only properties** initialized directly by a constructor or by an object initializer are **not virtual** [^1],
6. **Read-only properties** that return a member value provided through a constructor are **not virtual** [^1],
7. **Computed read-only properties** are **virtual** [^1].

[^1]: Unless it is justified in a specific case to not do so.

## Consequences

1. Simplified decision-making process when designing new classes and their extensibility (including constructors).
3. Coherence across the solution.