# 03. Attribute key mapping

Date: 2021-09-19

## Context

There are interfaces that specify properties representing DOT attributes of an element (e.g. *IDotGraphAttributes*). Their structure is record-like, that is they expose only primitive properties that get or set the value of an associated DOT attribute. The interfaces are used for several purposes:

1. If multiple classes are meant to expose the same DOT attributes as properties, the interfaces ensure their coherence,
2. Every class that exposes DOT attributes as properties has the so-called *attribute accessor*. The accessor uses the inteface to let the user formulate property expressions to refer to specific DOT attributes by the properties of that interface in order to customize their value or get the underlying attribute to set its comment. The accessor extends this way the base functionality provided by the exposed properties themselves, which is getting and setting the values of the associated DOT attributes. The interface provided to the accessor determines what properties are available for the extended functionality it provides.

## Decision

There are several rules that apply to the mentioned interfaces:

1. For the *attribute accessor* to work, the class that exposes DOT attributes as properties has to provide a mapping between the properties of the interface (which it implements) and associated DOT attribute keys. This is done by a lookup builder described later.
2. The *attribute accessor* works only on the direct members of the class that exposes DOT attributes as properties, so for instance the interface *IDotGraphRootAttributes* would be invalid for the accessor (since it contains nested property groups), but its base *IDotGraphAttributes* interface would be the correct one to use (since it is flat).
3. Classes that expose DOT attributes as properties have to have their properties annotated with the *DotAttributeKey* attribute to specify a DOT attribute key for them (either directly or by a descendant class).



The following rules apply to the classes that expose DOT attributes as properties:

1. The classes use lookups that contain mappings between properties of the interface that the classes implement and the DOT attribute keys specified by the *DotAttributeKey* attributes the implemented properties on the class are annotated with.
2. Attribute key lookups are built lazily and stored as private static instances per class. A lazy build occurs on the first access to a property of a class that represents a DOT attribute (as opposed to the first access to the class itself).
   1. The static lookup instances are shared (not copied) between instances of the attribute classes.
3. A builder populates the lookup with properties of the implemented interface mapped to DOT attribute keys.

## Consequences

1. Before implementing the lazy build for lookups, all classes that exposed DOT attribute properties used to built the lookups statically on the first access to them (any kind of access). This happened usually on graph creation because the initialization of that class involves initialization of multiple other classes that contain mentioned lookups. Introducing lazy built reduced the build operations to be performed only those classes, where any property has been accessed. Thanks to that, there should usually be fewer entries stored in memory. A lookup encompasses all properties of the interface it is associated with.
2. It is correct to define properties in a class without annotating them with the *DotAttributeKey* attribute, but the properties have to be overridden by a descendant to eventually provide the DOT attribute key through the use of the mentioned *DotAttributeKey* annotation. Otherwise, the lookup builder will throw an exception.
3. It is possible to define properties annotated with the *DotAttributeKey* attribute, but still be able to override them and assign different DOT attribute keys to them in descendant classes. The lookup builder supports that by mapping the base implementations of property accessors to an attribute key, so it doesn't matter whether a lookup is performed for an accessor on a descendant or on the base class (the same key is always returned, that is the key of the descendant if specified there, or of the base implementation otherwise).